Charter cities
==============

The Planet Money [podcast #415 was on chartered cities][0]. These gleaming, and 
entirely imaginary for now, city states. Featuring extreme  economic liberty
inside the borders of a poorer country. The concept was introduced to the world
via a [2009 TED talk from Paul Romer][1] and you can read all about the idea at
his [charter cities website][2] as well. 

 [0]: http://www.npr.org/blogs/money/2012/11/09/164813887/episode-415-can-a-poor-country-start-over?ft=1&f=93559255
 [1]: http://www.ted.com/talks/paul_romer.html
 [2]: http://chartercities.org/

Chartered cities! The instant criticism is that they reek of repackaged 
colonialism. Paul Romer disagrees of course, he defends his idea by saying that
they are about choice and free will. Not ideas and power structures pushed from
outside. 

Well okay. If chartered cities are so beneficial then why not start one in the 
US first. If the end result will be beneficial then you could start one anywhere
that was economically blighted and it would flourish

How would the US react to a city state within its borders with international
judges and law enforcement? Pretty poorly.

What does the idea behind using external law enforcement and judges say about 
the perception of the local population? Why is this not colonial thinking. If
what you are saying is that it will take outside (Western) agency to get things
working then the implication is that the local population is somehow less
trustworthy. Less capable. 

The whole episode begs the question. It never examines the idea that there
are no existing models for a poor country to be turned into a rich country.
What about China? Their economic growth has been incredible and they certainly
did not do it by allowing outside interests to control their economy, or small
parts of it. In fact they did the exact opposite. The Chinese government 
simply creates legislation that benefits itself first. They operate on a
principle of self interest. Much like other successful economies. Obey
international copyright agreements? Why? It would not benefit China since they
do not have huge amounts of intellectual property, yet. When they do, then they
might be more interested. Before a country has media giants extracting wealth 
via the medium of IP law. How do IP laws benefit them at all? Why spend money 
on software when you can just pirate it? 

But the idea that poorer countries should operate with complete self interest
is somehow difficult for some people to entertain. It is certainly very much
against the economic interest of the US. Maybe that is why it is never
mentioned.

But not mentioning it is pretty intellectually dishonest. Since it blows the
whole concept of charter cities apart. Since they represent the ultimate
assertion of external economic interest in the affairs of another country.
